Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Parallel Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/parco

A heterogeneous processing-in-memory approach to accelerate quantum
chemistry simulation
Zeshi Liu a,b ,∗, Zhen Xie d , Wenqian Dong f , Mengting Yuan e ,∗∗, Haihang You a,c ,∗∗, Dong Li d ,∗∗
a

State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Zhongguancun Laboratory, China
d
University of California, Merced, United States of America
e
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
f Florida International university, United States of America
b
c

ARTICLE

INFO

Keywords:
Parallel computing
Processing-in-memory
Heterogeneous architecture
Dynamically scheduling
Ab initio method

ABSTRACT
The ‘‘memory wall’’ is an architectural property introducing high memory access latency that can manifest
application performance, and this wall becomes even taller in the context of big data. Although the use of
GPU-based systems could achieve high performance, it is difficult to improve the utilization of GPU systems due
to the ‘‘memory wall’’. The intensive data exchange and computation remains a challenge when confronting
applications with a massive memory footprint. Quantum-mechanics-based ab initio calculations, which leverage
high-performance computing to investigate multi-electron systems, have been widely used in computational
chemistry. However, ab initio calculations are labor-intensive and can easily consume more than hundreds
of gigabytes of memory. Previous efforts on heterogeneous accelerators via GPU and CPU suffer from highlatency off-device memory access. In this paper, we introduce heterogeneous processing-in-memory (PIM) to
mitigate the overhead of data movement between CPUs and GPUs, and deeply analyze two of the most memoryintensive parts of the quantum chemistry, for example, the FFT and time-consuming loops. Specifically, we
exploit runtime systems and programming models to improve hardware utilization and simplify programming
efforts by moving computation close to the data and eliminating hardware idling. We take a widely used
software, the QUANTUM ESPRESSO (opEn-Source Package for Research in Electronic Structure, Simulation,
and Optimization), to perform our experiments, and our results show that our design provides up to 4.09× and
2.60× of performance improvement and 71% and 88% energy reduction over CPU and GPU (NVIDIA P100),
respectively.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the explosive growth of data increases the gap
between the processor and memory, and the ‘‘memory wall’’ problem
becomes one of the major bottlenecks of the whole system. For example, the latency of executing a memory load/store instruction on the
CPU is over 100 CPU cycles [1]. Deep learning, one of the hottest technologies today, relies heavily on graphics processing units (GPUs) to
train deep neural networks (DNNs). The VGG [2] and AlexNet [3] have
138M and 61M parameters to train, respectively, requiring massive
computational and memory resources. Data movement between processing units becomes the critical performance and energy bottleneck
in the face of compute- and memory-intensive applications.

Previous efforts use partitioning or pruning methods to exploit
cache or memory size, such as FFTW [4], DNN Pruning [5]. But these
methods impose the difficulty of understanding the algorithm and are
hard to keep pace with the rapid growth of data volume in the context
of big data, because the overhead of data movement to support the
data-intensive operations is intolerable as the data volume becomes
larger. Using GPU-based systems can achieve high performance and
take advantage of high memory bandwidth, but can still suffer from
excessive data movement. Because some computational patterns are
inefficient for the GPUs (e.g., modulo operations in a large loop), there
is an inherent overhead in data exchange between GPUs and CPU
memory. In fact, the category of full-particle-simulate algorithms are
difficult to deploy on current architectures because they have a massive

∗ Corresponding author at: State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, China.
∗∗ Corresponding authors.

E-mail addresses: liuzeshi@ict.ac.cn (Z. Liu), zxie10@ucmerced.edu (Z. Xie), wdong@fiu.edu (W. Dong), ymt@whu.edu.cn (M. Yuan),
youhaihang@ict.ac.cn (H. You), dli35@ucmerced.edu (D. Li).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2023.103017
Received 16 October 2022; Received in revised form 10 February 2023; Accepted 23 February 2023
Available online 1 March 2023
0167-8191/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

to accelerate memory-intensive applications, such as using only fixed
function PIM (with high-parallelism) [20], only programmable PIM
(with high efficiency) [24], and heterogeneous PIM (the combination
that provides both parallelism and efficiency) [18,25,26].
However, previous approaches use only fixed units to perform computation and few programmable units that are merely used to manage
data movement. Their design supports only specific applications, which
is inflexible and expensive to use. In order to use PIM to efficiently
accelerate more applications, we need to improve the logic pattern and
the offloading method for the algorithm so that the PIM design can
accept more computation patterns and we can take advantage of its
memory and parallelism efficiency. To do this, we need to address a
couple of challenges.
First, from the architectural perspective, it is difficult to design the
PIM architecture to satisfy all the characteristics in DQC. By using fixed
function PIM, we can achieve high-parallelism, but the fixed pattern
cannot accept all the computation, which reduces the hardware utilization. In addition, managing all of the fixed function PIMs introduces
an extra load to the CPU. Programmable PIM is flexible, but it requires
more area than the fixed function PIM, and its extra power consumption
limits the number of it.
The recent work introduced a heterogeneous PIM design to accelerate neural network (NN) training [25] and graph processing [18],
which takes advantage of both fixed function PIM and programmable
PIM. However, their design is difficult to be fully utilized. The previous
fixed pattern has only simple algorithmic and logic units (ALUs), for
example, using simple multipliers to perform matrix–vector multiplication in [18], or using a simple combination of adders and multipliers to
perform NN training in [25]. It is difficult to use such a simple pattern
to accelerate other algorithms, because computations in other implementations cannot be directly offloaded to PIMs (e.g., DFT in DQC).
Furthermore, it is difficult to coordinate many simple fixed-function
PIMs with few programmable PIMs because the synchronization overhead (e.g., latency of PIM initialization, lock acquisition, lock release,
etc.) is large in the previous heterogeneous design. How we should
design the PIM architecture (in terms of PIM heterogeneity and fixed
function PIM configurations) to accommodate more algorithms needs
to be studied.
Second, from the software perspective, the software must make
efficient utilization of the hardware and be easy-to-use. Using heterogeneous processing units may introduce synchronization and idle
overhead into the system due to data dependencies. It is a challenge to eliminate these overheads, because introducing cross-bank
data movement to align each processing unit may degrade the overall efficiency. Furthermore, when using heterogeneous PIM, how to
program PIMs without making disruptive changes to legacy code is
challenging. Adopting new programming models such as OpenCL to
rewrite the application as in the existing effort [25] is difficult for a
large project because of the complexity of the code (such as the DQC,
350,000+ lines). Ideally, the programming effort for PIM should be
properly integrated into the current programming models in parallelism
(e.g., MPI and OpenMP).
To address the above challenges and fully exploit the hardware
potential, we introduce a hardware–software co-design, which includes
optimization for two sides: The first insight is that the bottleneck
of DQC comes from the huge amount of FFT and loop computation.
We introduce a new fixed pattern for the fixed function PIM to fit
the computation in the algorithm more generally (such as FFT and
loops in DQC). To achieve an optimal tradeoff between parallelism and
flexibility, we introduce a fixed-programmable model. We evaluate different configurations of heterogeneous PIM and find the most effective
combination to exploit the strengths of fixed and programmable PIM.
The second is that the runtime cannot efficiently utilize the hardware. We adopt a data-aware strategy to minimize data synchronization
and movement in FFT and loops, and introduce a locality-aware method
to offload computation to the appropriate unit in the heterogeneous

memory footprint and a special computational pattern that cannot be
efficiently offloaded to the GPUs.
The goal of full-particle-simulate algorithms is to predict the motion, structure, and other properties of a particle system based on
physical or chemical laws. For example, molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation is used to model the motions of atomic systems over a
discrete time step based on the Newton’s laws of motion. MD uses a lot
of communication and computation but little memory, which is incompatible with the general purpose architecture. As a result, MD requires
a special communication mesh and high-performance computing units,
such as Anton [6].
The ab initio calculation of multi-electron systems based on quantum mechanics, runs rather inefficiently on traditional architectures.
The ab initio calculation aims to analyze the physical or chemical
properties of a multi-electron system through the Schrödinger wave
equation, which is widely used in the field of chemistry, physics and
materials, such as small-molecules, superconductivity, nanotubes [7].
However, the Schrödinger equation has 3 × 𝑁 variables (𝑁 is the total
number of particles, about 1023 ∕cm3 ), which is difficult to solve.
The density functional theory (DFT) [8] provides a non-empirical
method for performing ab initio calculations. The idea of DFT is that
the functional of the density distribution of electrons in the ground
state alone determines the properties of a system. Therefore, instead of
solving the Schrödinger wave equation, we only need to find the electron density distribution, which greatly simplifies quantum-mechanicsbased ab initio calculation [9]. However, DFT still has strict performance requirements for performing a full-particle-simulate of a large
particle system, since the computational and memory requirements
increase rapidly with the number of particles.
In this paper, we take the density functional theory-based ab initio
quantum chemistry method [10] (hereafter referred to as ‘‘DQC’’)
as a typical application, and show how processing-in-memory (PIM)
technology can be used to eliminate the bottleneck in quantum mechanics based ab initio calculations. PIM achieves remarkable success
by reducing data transfer energy and latency by adding data processing
capability in memory. In addition, PIM introduces new parallelism into
the system, which is able to process in parallel with the CPU [11–
14]. Our solution can be easily extended to other algorithms that have
massive computation and memory accesses.
Unlike MD simulation, DQC uses massive memory and computation,
but little communication. DQC simulation can be accelerated by GPUs.
However, the use of GPUs still suffers from memory problems such
as high-latency off-device memory access and out-of-memory (OOM).
Existing work has confirmed that the main bottleneck in DQC simulation is memory access [15,16]. In fact, frequent data access in fast
Fourier transform (FFT) and compute-intensive loops introduces high
memory access latencies that impact performance. These FFTs and
loops consume hundreds of gigabytes of memory and 70% of the total
execution time (shown in Section 2). When the GPU is used for DQC, it
takes time and energy to move data between the host and GPU memory.
In addition, the part with the special computation pattern, such as
modulo operations in a large loop, cannot be offloaded directly to the
GPUs. How to accelerate these FFTs and loops and enable scalable
performance on hardware (e.g., GPUs) has attracted much research
effort [15,17].
Processing-in-memory (PIM) offers a promising solution to the data
movement challenge with memory latency as low as one percent of
the CPU (≤ 2 CPU cycles [1]) and a maximum bandwidth of over
300 GB/s [18,19], which is attracting much research effort [20–25].
PIM employs divide and conquer in memory, which avoids expensive
and frequent data movement by introducing computational logics into
the logic die in main memory. This makes PIM suitable for full-particlesimulate algorithms. In addition, PIM enables massive parallelism by
integrating multiple processing units (e.g., adders and multipliers),
which provides an efficient approach for accelerating FFTs and loops
in DQC. Existing efforts have demonstrated the success of using PIM
2

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

DQC on GPUs. The use of GPUs can speed up DQC simulation
through their massive parallelism. In fact, GPU versions of DQC implementations have been successfully developed, such as QE-GPU, VASPGPU. However, the huge memory footprint of DQC reduces the performance of the codes on GPUs. First, GPU versions of DQC typically
require high-end GPUs with large local memory, which is expensive.
Second, it is time-consuming to move data between the CPU and GPUs,
which becomes the bottleneck of GPU acceleration.
DQC on distributed systems. DQC simulation can also utilize
hybrid parallel tools (MPI plus OpenMP) to exploit its parallelism,
which is mature among each implementation such as QE, VASP. But
distributed systems suffer from the heavy collective communication of
DQC, which is mainly in 3D FFT, to perform gathering and scattering.
Our experiment on QE plus MPI shows that using 24 processes on
4 machines takes 12569.46% more collective communication time
than 24 processes on 1 machine, and that 95.30%, 12.37% of the
total execution time is spent on communication on 4 and 1 machines,
respectively.

Fig. 1. A typical workflow of DQC simulation. Phases in the yellow background are
based on loop structures, and phases in the red boxes employ 3D-FFT computation.

PIM design. In addition, we explore the data dependency in DQC and
introduce a hybrid execution method, to further improve hardware
utilization. Finally, we leverage the existing ‘‘parallel for’’ or ‘‘target’’
program constructs in OpenMP or CUDA to offload computation to the
PIM units. This method requires minor changes to the application, but
naturally decomposes the computation and maps it to the PIM.
This paper explores the potential of accelerating quantummechanics-based ab initio calculations of multi-electron systems by
using heterogeneous PIM. We make the following contributions.

2.2. Performance characterization
The DQC simulation is memory-intensive, easily consuming over
hundreds of gigabytes of memory. We use gprof, PAPI, and logs from
the application to collect profiling results to analyze the performance
characterization in DQC in terms of invocations, cache misses, and
execution time of each phase.
We take AUSURF112 and Si63Ge-vc-relax [29] as our test cases.
Fig. 2 shows the profiling results. In this paper, we do not discuss other
cases like Ta2O5 [29]. The Ta205 test case requires too much memory
to offload to the GPUs, causing an out-of-memory (OOM) problem.
As shown in Fig. 2, the FFTs and the loop-based computation phases
constitute the most time-consuming parts, consuming 78% and 79% of
the execution time on Si63Ge-vc-relax and AUSURF112, respectively.
Specifically, the FFTs phase represents the calculation based on FFTs,
such as potentials. The loop-based calculation phase represents the calculation of quantities based on loop structures, such as charge density
(as shown in Fig. 1). The other parts, including the initial phase and
the update phase, take up less than 30% of the execution time, which
is not the most critical part in our research topic.
After deploying the DQC application on a distributed system or GPU
system, we gain three observations.

• We identify the memory access requirements of quantum mechanics based ab initio calculations. We take DQC as a typical
application and show that its memory bottleneck can be solved by
heterogeneous PIM in terms of its separability and data-locality.
• We propose a hardware–software co-design that includes a heterogeneous PIM design that balances parallelism and flexibility, and runtime systems that achieve high utilization and efficiency when executing the program on the new PIM architecture.
We also employ program constructs to minimize changes to the
application.
• We reveal that DQC with our PIM design outperforms CPU (multicore), GPU (NVIDIA P100), fixed-function PIM and programmable
PIM by up to 4.09×, 2.60×, 1.59×, and 1.57× in performance,
respectively. Our design achieves 71% and 88% energy savings
compared to CPU and GPU, respectively.

• The pattern of full-particle-simulate algorithms results in a massive memory footprint. According to the profiling results, the data
allocation phase takes up to 18.22% of the execution time on
distributed systems (and 11.9% on GPUs in particular).
• The frequent switching among massive batches results in a high
cache miss rate at runtime. Fig. 2(b) shows that 49% of the FFT
time (sum of 0.2–1.0 in Fig. 2(b)) is consumed by invocations with
a cache miss rate higher than 0.2.
• The large amount of data in the DQC application results in a
high communication overhead that overwhelms the benefits of
parallelizing the DQC application on a distributed system.

2. Background and motivation
We present background information on DQC, and then analyze its
bottleneck through a profiling study. Finally, we motivate our design
of the heterogeneous PIM.
2.1. Density functional theory based ab initio Quantum Chemistry Method
(DQC)
Ab initio quantum chemistry method solves the electronic
Schrödinger equation, and enables theoretical chemists to solve a range
of problems, such as structures and thermochemistry [10]. The density
functional theory (DFT) method is one of the main approaches in
ab initio quantum chemistry, which uses functionals between electron density and ground state energy, to calculate the many-electron
function [27]. Software implementing DQC are similar, such as the
Quantum ESPRESSO (opEn-Source Package for Research in Electronic
Structure, Simulation, and Optimization, referenced as QE), the Vienna
Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP), and the Car-Parrinello Molecular
Dynamics (CPMD), etc. Fig. 1 gives a general flow of them. In this
paper, we use Quantum ESPRESSO [28] (referenced as QE) as a
platform to study DQC.

We further analyze the two most time-consuming phases, the FFT
phase and the loop phase. The bottleneck of the FFT phase is the batch
computation or communication. The bottleneck of the loop phase is the
irregular memory access or computation pattern.
FFT. As the most time-consuming part of the DQC, the FFT has a
high invocation rate and suffers from a high cache miss rate. In a single
run of Si63Ge-vc-relax, the FFT function is invoked 993,802 times.
Each FFT function decomposes a 3D FFT into small pieces of 1D and
2D FFTs and uses different FFT grids in reciprocal space as its inputs.
These inputs are not contiguous and not trivially distributed in memory,
resulting in a high cache miss rate (CMR).
As shown in Fig. 3, (a) represents the proportion of CMR of the
FFT invocations and (b) represents the associated execution time of
3

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Although the fixed function PIMs can provide massive parallelism,
using only the fixed function PIMs is insufficient for DQC. First, fixed
function PIMs only achieve computational benefits by offloading frequently used operations to the fixed logic units. In our problem, DQC
has a large number of operations that are too complex to be use
as fixed functions. Second, fixed function PIMs lack of programming
flexibility. In DQC, the computation of electrons cannot benefit from
the fixed pattern, and the use of fixed pattern introduces the overhead of frequent task spawning and synchronization. Therefore, we
adopt a heterogeneous design of both the fixed function PIMs and
programmable PIMs. By doing so, the heterogeneous design combines
the strength of fixed function and programmable PIM in parallel and
flexible computing, and forms the hybrid execution to further improve
hardware utilization.
The heterogeneous design of PIM introduces challenges. First, there
are no existing tools of such a heterogeneous design available for DQC
simulation. Liu et al. [25] introduces a heterogeneous PIM to accelerate
neural network training, but they only set a single programmable PIM
(with 4 cores) and lack flexibility; Huang et al. [18] employs heterogeneous PIM to accelerate graph processing, but they only use multipliers
as the fixed function in PIM, which lacks diversity and not sufficient
for a variety of functions in DQC. Second, after the introduction of
heterogeneous design, the current software-level strategy of managing
data movement is obsolete.
To fully exploit the hardware potential of PIM for DQC, we propose
a hardware–software co-design for heterogeneous PIMs attached to
CPU system, in which: (1) PIM cooperates with CPU to exploit the
parallelism of DQC; (2) CPU provides large memory capacity so that
PIM can easily access data of DQC; (3) CPU provides high scheduling
flexibility to implement efficient task scheduling.
It is worth to note that our work is not limited to DQC applications.
Our work uses the extended OpenMP program constructs to provide
acceleration for FFT and loop structures (Section 3.2.2). This method
makes our work not only applicable to DFT-based applications, but also
broadly applicable to other work with FFT and loop structures.

Fig. 2. Execution time distribution in QE.

Fig. 3. Distribution of 3D FFT invocations in terms of number of invocations (a) and
execution time (b), classified according to their last level cache miss rate.

each part of (a). We observe that a higher CMR results in a higher
execution time. Specifically, the invocations that cause a CMR higher
than 0.5 take only 13% of the total FFT invocations, but take 26%
of the execution time of all FFT invocations. Conversely, 74% of the
invocations cause a CMR less than 0.2 and take only 51% of the FFT
time. These results reveal that the high CMR will dramatically effect
(longer) the execution time of FFT functions.
Loops. The loop-based computation phase is another timeconsuming phase that demonstrates great potential for acceleration.
Running
Si63Ge-vc-relax invokes 452,186 loops (if we have a nested loop,
we focus on the most outer loop). These loop-based computations go
through all dimensions of all atoms and use iterative methods to do the
diagonalization, so they have huge iteration numbers [28].
Loop-based computation is the second time-consuming phase observed from Fig. 2. With profiling, we observe that loop-based computation includes fixed and flexible patterns.
The fixed patterns in loops are computations consisting of a combination of addition and multiplication (e.g., ‘(a+b)*x+c)’). These fixed
patterns have rich parallelism that can be leveraged by GPUs, but
successive invoking of the fixed patterns is rare.
The flexible pattern means computations with some logic. For example, the flexible pattern includes if-condition, absolute operations,
modulo operations, etc. in a large loop. These flexible patterns are
difficult to parallelize on GPUs because they have dependencies on
their variables. They further reduce the performance of codes on GPUs
because they always occur before or after the fixed patterns.

3. Design
For hardware design, we introduce a new fixed pattern to efficiently
exploit the heterogeneous PIM architecture. Then, in software design,
we employ a locality-aware mapping method for more efficient hybrid
execution. And we propose using program constructs to minimize
changes to the application.
3.1. Heterogeneous PIM design
In this section, we provide an overview of the heterogeneous PIM
design. Fig. 4 depicts the entire workflow. The heterogeneous design
is implemented in the logic layer, which is connected to multiple
stacked DRAM layers by through silicon vias (TSVs) [30], as shown
in Fig. 4(a). The connection between the memory stacks and the CPU
is implemented by the silicon interposer.
The fixed function PIM is implemented as logic pairs rather than
single logic to reduce data movement between fixed function PIMs.
Memory controllers in each memory bank are used for data movement
between banks. In order to alleviate the thermal issues, we place more
fixed function PIMs in edge and corner banks, because the banks at the
edge and corner banks have better thermal dissipation paths and can
therefore support higher compute densities.
The programmable PIMs cooperated with a set of fixed function
PIMs in memory banks form PIM heterogeneity (as shown in Fig. 4(c)).
The use of heterogeneous PIMs introduces a tradeoff between parallelism and flexibility. There is up to 21.5% performance difference
between different heterogeneous configurations (most of which comes
from idling) due to the inappropriate fixed-programmable ratio (shown

2.3. Heterogeneous processing-in-memory
PIM, which enables a logic layer of 3D memory stacks to perform fixed functions (e.g., adder and bit-shifting) or be generally programmable in memory, has reached proliferation by its efficient memory access, high parallelism and energy-efficient computing [20]. Considering its advantages, PIM can mitigate the overhead of the latencybound and data-intensive application, DQC. Specifically, in the performance characterization study, the results of initializing and synchronizing multiple PIMs show that PIM is promising in reducing the
latency and energy consumption associated with data movement [1]
and enjoying the high memory bandwidth (over 300 GB/s [18,19])
through 3D-stacked memory device.
4

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Fig. 4. Overview of our new heterogeneous PIM architecture design. The fixed function PIM has two adders and one multiplier, and there are 24 programmable PIMs, which are
close to the center of the memory stack as much as possible within each bank.

Fixed-programmable model for PIM heterogeneity. With increasing the number of fixed function PIMs in the heterogeneous design, we
have to perform task offloading frequently, which can take up to 20%
of additional execution time. On the other hand, using programmable
PIMs suffers from the limitation in terms of area and thermal constraints. Therefore, we build the fixed-programmable model to achieve
the optimal balance of the heterogeneous architecture.
The fixed-programmable model is empirical and based on a series of
simulations. The model also follows the constraints of area and thermal
in PIM design [26]. We introduce a constant factor to ensure the
accuracy of the model. The model shows that different configurations
of heterogeneous PIM lead to very different effects on performance.
Details of our experiments are given in Section 5.2.2. According to the
results of our model, we end up using a 24-bank memory stack (each
bank is a vertical slice in the stack), and we use 24 programmable PIMs
(each has 1 core). The number of fixed function PIMs in each memory
bank is 12, and the total number of fixed function PIMs is 288, as shown
in Fig. 4(b).

in Section 5.3). Therefore, we design a fixed-programmable model to
balance our design of fixed function PIM and programmable PIM.
Fixed function PIM. The massive fixed function PIM forms the
parallelism of the heterogeneous PIM, but it may not be well suited to
the application well unless a proper pattern is adopted. For example,
the most common design employs one multiplier plus one adder as
the fixed pattern. But in DQC simulation, the calculation is more
than this pattern, such as a formula of ‘(a+b)*c+(d+e)*f’. We propose
to use ‘(a+b)*x+c’ as the fixed function, which is the most flexible
computation pattern in the DQC simulation. The cost of the pre-adder
in the fixed function PIM is affordable (both in hardware area and
execution time), while it can dramatically reduce the synchronization
time up to 50% by simplifying the offloading procedure.
Programmable PIM. As Fig. 4(e) shows, the programmable PIM is
an ARM-based core. The programmable PIM maintains a dual mission:
The fixed PIM controller is used to offload computations to the fixed
function PIM in the same bank; the data processing unit is used to
handle computations of other patterns, such as if-conditions, absolute
operations, modulo operations, and so on. Our design allows the heterogeneous PIMs to work efficiently on the local computation within
one memory bank.
The previous work of Huang et al. [18] and Liu et al. [25] is
not sufficient in the programmable units, which either makes the
programmable PIM passively receive the offloaded workload [18], or
uses only a single programmable PIM (with 4 cores) to manage all
workloads [25]. Instead, we enable programmable PIMs to be active
to fetch workloads from the task queue, resulting in a reduction in
hardware idle time. Programmable PIMs are flexible, but are limited
by area and workload parallelism. This is because a programmable PIM
occupies more than 3× of the area of a fixed function PIM. Using too
many programmable PIMs results in inferior performance, as indicated
in Section 5.
Memory controller. The memory controller is used to manage communication between DRAM and PIMs, including two tasks: fetch data,
workloads in the local bank, and offload them to the programmable
or fixed function PIM; request/send data, workloads from/to remote
banks. Requesting a remote data is inefficient because the memory
controller need to communicate with another memory bank through
deterministic X–Y routing in a mesh network (as shown in Fig. 4(b)).
Therefore, the cross-bank communication should be avoided. In our
work, we adopt a decentralized layout of memory controllers, distributing memory controllers in different banks to reduce the data
transmission distance among PIMs. We also introduce a locality-aware
mapping method to partition and map data appropriately to efficiently
reduce the communication overhead by remaining the computation on
the local data.

3.2. Software design
In this section, we propose a software design to maximize the
performance of heterogeneous PIMs in the most time-consuming phases
(FFT and loops), in which we resolve memory access problems through
data locality-aware method and hybrid execution method.
3.2.1. Data locality-aware method
In the data locality-aware method, we leverage a set of low-level
APIs to access the address of PIMs, and allocate memory banks for
workload offload. The data locality-aware method consists of two parts:
partitioning and mapping.
Partition: Loops in DQC iteratively compute forces, potential, position of each atom in the computational loops, which can be good for
partitioning to exploit the parallelism from the fixed function PIMs.
Also, the calculation of FFT is consistently based on the Cooley–Tukey
algorithm (such as FFTW, Intel MKL), which divides an FFT into small
pieces and leaves a large room for parallel improvement. As Fig. 5(a)
(b) shows, we divide the loops into interactions and partition the FFT
into pieces via the Cooley–Tukey algorithm.
Mapping: The remote data required by a PIM needs to move across
memory banks through X–Y routing, which is expensive in 3D stacked
memory. So we distribute the task pieces of the loops and the FFT to
heterogeneous PIM. The mapping procedure is presented in Fig. 5(c)
(d). We use ‘‘codelet’’ to offload the task pieces to heterogeneous PIM,
and each task piece will be allocated to the nearest PIMs (in the same
memory banks with data). By doing so, we can avoid expensive data
movement across memory banks.
5

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Fig. 5. The overall software workflow.

Given a codelet, to determine which memory bank its data belongs
to, we employ the following method. For data objects that the codelet
works on, the operating system (OS) exposes the physical address
ranges of the data objects to the user level on the CPU, so that the
runtime system can embed the address information into codelets. When
the codelet is offloaded, the memory controller uses the address information to decide which memory bank the codelet will go to based on
the address mapping scheme. Thus, the corresponding programmable
PIM will be in charge of the codelet. If the data is distributed across
multiple memory banks, then the memory bank with the most data is
in charge of the codelet.
Detail for FFT. By the widely used Cooley–Tukey algorithm, a size𝑛 Fourier transform can be decomposed into 𝑝 size-𝑞 transform, where
𝑛 = 𝑝𝑞. The decomposition provides a convenient way to improve the
performance of the FFT because a lot of techniques can take advantage
of it, for example, to improve data locality by fitting each size-𝑞 Fourier
transform into the last level cache, or to improve the parallelism of
multi-core/GPUs.
However, FFT in DQC cannot enjoy this convenience because DQC
involves massive FFT, the data of which has a huge memory footprint.
During DQC simulation, invocations of massive FFT calculation still
cause high CMR due to the frequent data movement. In addition, the
massive memory footprint also leads to the inefficiency of applying
accelerators (such as GPU). Although the state-of-the-art GPU has about
ten gigabytes of memory, there is a bottleneck in moving data between
main memory and GPU memory.
We accelerate FFT through our hardware–software co-design of the
heterogeneous PIM system. With the help of decomposition, we can easily map and schedule the computation to take advantage of the parallelism from fixed function PIM. We can also constrain the computation
inside a memory bank and eliminate memory access overhead.
In FFT, the basic decomposition of the computation is wrapped as a
codelet. Besides the codelet that performs the decomposed transform
(named ‘‘normal codelet’’), there is another type of codelet (named
‘‘twiddle codelet’’) that combines the results of two normal codelets to
obtain a new result. Normal codelets can run in full parallel, without
dependency on each other. The twiddle codelets have to execute after
their dependent normal codelets, as shown in Fig. 5(b).
As for the implementation, our approach is to modify the execution
phase by our extended construct, based on the existing construct of
OpenMP in the FFT library: when getting decomposition from the
initial phase, we distribute each codelet to its corresponding PIM. Each
codelet is wrapped as a kernel to execute, which can either be offloaded
to an idle CPU core or an idle programmable PIM. In the programmable
PIM, the codelet is further decomposed into the computation pattern
that matches the fixed pattern and then offloaded to fixed function
PIMs.
Detail for loops. The loop-based computation phase is another
time-consuming part of DQC simulation. The loop structures in DQC
are difficult to accelerate. This is because, for CPU cores, the loops
have considerable data to compute and change computing pattern
frequently, which cannot be fitted into caches. For the GPU, these loops

have many special computational patterns (e.g., if-conditions in a large
loop) that cannot be efficiently adapted to the GPU. As a result, only a
few loops in the DQC implementation are accelerated in GPU versions
of DQC.
Using PIMs can resolve the memory access problems of these loops.
The loop structures in DQC benefit from our heterogeneous PIM architecture because we introduce many programmable PIMs to provide
flexibility, and the additional pre-adder in the fixed function PIMs can
significantly reduce synchronization time.
Instead of offloading the entire loop (especially a large loop) to
the heterogeneous PIM, which leads to serious load imbalance: while
the heterogeneous PIM is busy, the CPU becomes idle due to data
dependency. We consider each iteration of the loop as a codelet and
subject to schedule it to run on either the CPU or the heterogeneous
PIM to address the idle problems. Since the computation for the different atoms and forces has no dependency between them, the runtime
system can easily and dynamically schedule these codelets based on the
availability of CPU or programmable PIMs. The scheduling strategy for
loops is the same as which for FFTs, so only one task queue is required.
3.2.2. Hybrid execution method
In order to further improve hardware utilization, a hybrid execution
method is introduced to maximize parallelism and eliminate hardware
idle time. The hybrid execution method includes a task queue and a
runtime scheduling mechanism, as shown in Fig. 5(c).
Tasks to be launched on any PIM are represented as task kernels
by our extended OpenMP construct, and Algorithm 1 provides an example of how we use OpenMP directives to offload computation to the
heterogeneous PIM. The OpenMP target construct was introduced in
OpenMP 4.0 to enable offloading of a parallel for construct to a
device (e.g., GPU or FPGA). Using the extended OpenMP construct is
a natural choice for offloading workloads to PIMs because OpenMP is
widely used to exploit the parallelism of both FFTs and loops in the
DQC implementation.
Line 1 in Algorithm 1 shows the OpenMP task construct. The
following code region (lines 2–5) is offloadable to programmable PIMs.
To allow programmable PIMs to offload computation to fixed function
PIMs, we introduce a new OpenMP directive, fixed_pim. Line 3 in
Algorithm 1 uses this directive to create a recursive PIM kernel that can
be offloaded to a fixed function PIM. The code with the omp target
and fixed_pim directives will be translated by the compiler into new
code to run on programmable and fixed function PIMs, which includes
a kernel to be launched on a programmable PIM, and the kernel
includes primitive calls that offload computation to fixed function PIMs.
Algorithms 2 and 3 show the new code after the code transformation,
which uses primitives to offload computation to fixed function PIMs
(line 5 in Algorithm 3).
Then, with the help of low-level APIs (Section 4.2), the runtime
determines whether a specific PIM is busy and whether a specific task
is complete, and forms a task queue for hybrid execution. Whenever a
CPU core or a programmable PIM becomes idle, it fetches a codelet to
execute. However, our codelet scheduling strategy favors the memory
6

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Detail for FFT. Given an FFT translation, all of its normal codelets
are wrapped as task kernels and placed in a task queue to be scheduled
and executed. The twiddle codelets are queued only after their dependencies have been addressed. The initialization and decomposition
phase of our PIM-based FFT is exactly the same as the typical implementation of the FFT library in DQC, and differs only in the execution
phase: the parallel execution on CPU/GPU is replaced by execution on
PIMs.
Detail for loops. The loop structures are easily accelerated using
our extended OpenMP target construct. Each iteration of loops is
wrapped as a task kernel and also be placed in the task queue to be
scheduled. Since there are very few data dependencies between iterations in DQC simulation, we only need to focus on the dependencies
within iterations, and we additionally use the directive to indicate
which operation can be overlapped by prefetching.

bank with the shortest distance of its data to reduce the overhead of
memory movement. In addition, the task kernel favors fixed function
PIMs over other compute units among the CPU and PIMs because fixed
function PIMs are more energy efficient and perform faster than other
compute units.
Each programmable PIM is in charge of its local fixed function PIM,
which means that it checks the completion of operations offloaded to
PIMs (either itself or a PIM it belongs to) and sends the completion
information to the CPU. Using the programmable PIM to drive the
synchronization improves execution efficiency by avoiding frequent
interrupts to the CPU, and reducing the overhead of kernel spawning
and synchronization between the host and PIMs.
Moreover, there are ordinarily dependencies inside the task kernel
that cause extra latency to PIMs. We eliminate hardware idling by
prefetching operations. When a PIM needs to wait for data from another
operation, an operation from another task kernel can be prefetched and
scheduled by the runtime to execute on the idle PIM, overlapping the
idle time.
The careful decomposition of the computation makes us have little
need to worry about memory consistency, but when it is necessary,
a relaxed memory consistency model is used in our design to reduce
hardware complexity: an update to a memory location by one PIM is
not visible to all the other PIMs until the end of the kernel call.

3.3. Generality for other applications
In this section, we analyze the generality of our hardware–software
co-design on another application besides DQC, namely LAMMPS [31], a
popular molecular dynamics (MD) simulator based on Newton’s laws of
motion. Algorithm 4 shows an example code in LAMMPS for calculating
moments of inertia.
From a hardware perspective, we add an extra pre-adder to the fixed
function PIM design. This pre-adder introduces a small overhead while
making the fixed function PIMs compatible with more computational
patterns. For example, lines 5–7 in Algorithm 4 can directly utilize our
pre-adder to compute the addition inside the brackets, but cannot directly offload to the classic pattern of fixed function PIMs (e.g., a*x+b).
Our profiling result throughout LAMMPS shows that, compared to the
classic pattern, 50% more of the computation can be offloaded directly
to the new pattern without pre-computation. In addition, we propose to
assign more programmable PIMs to increase flexibility and to adopt the
fixed-programmable model to find the most appropriate heterogeneous
ratio. Therefore, our hardware design can provide higher generality
compared to previous heterogeneous PIM design [18,25,32].
From a software perspective, we employ extended OpenMP program
constructs to improve the generality of our data locality-aware method
and our hybrid execution method. Algorithm 4 provides an example
of the use of program constructs to apply these two methods to the
computation of moments of inertia in LAMMPS. For the processes that
can be offloaded to PIMs, such as the time-consuming loop, the user
only needs to add one line of program construct to map data and
invoke PIMs (e.g., line 1 in Algorithm 4), and another line to indicate
which part of the code can be further offloaded to the fixed function
PIMs (e.g., line 4 in Algorithm 4). As shown in Algorithm 4, with our
extended OpenMP program constructs, the two methods of our software
design can be easily applied to other applications besides DQC, and take
advantage of the efficiency of heterogeneous PIMs.
4. Implementation
4.1. Hardware implementation
We determine the number of fixed function PIMs without violating
thermal and area constraints, based on [25,26]. We distribute 288 fixed
function PIMs across the 24 banks, and place 192 of fixed function
PIMs at the corner and edge banks to avoid the thermal issues. The
fixed function PIMs are 32-bit floating point multipliers, and each is
coupled with two adders. We employ ARM Cortex-A9 (1 core, 1.0 GHz)
processors as programmable PIMs, and there are 24 programmable
PIMs in our design.
7

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.
Table 1
Low-level APIs for PIM.
Name

Description

void get_phy_address(void* data, void* address, int length)

Get physical addresses of a specified data object.

void get_mem_bank(void* address, int* bank_ids)

Get bank IDs for a given physical address range.

int PIM_prog(int pim_id, PIM program_kernel)

Ask a programmable PIM to work on a kernel and
return a work ID.

int PIM_fix(int pim_id, void* args, void* ret)

Ask a specific fixed function PIM to
work with input args and return ret and a work ID.

int PIM_status(int pim_id)

Check whether a specific PIM is busy.

int work_query(int work_id)

Check whether a specific operation is completed.

void work_info(int work_id, int pim_id, int *data_loc)

Queries which PIMs do the work and
where the input/output data is for a work ID.

computation to fixed function PIMs and accepts completion signals. As
a result, the entire set of programmable PIMs appears as co-processors
that coordinates the host processors and manages the fixed function
PIMs, similar to a shared-memory multiprocessor system.

4.2. Low-level APIs for runtime system
We introduce a set of low-level APIs that allow the runtime system
to employ and dynamically control the heterogeneous PIM. Table 1 lists
the low-level APIs. These APIs implement the following functionality:
(1) specify which data object will expose its physical address during
memory allocation and return its address if any; (2) given a physical
address range, determine memory banks (the rationale for this API
is based on the work of Liu et al. [33]); (3) check the status of
PIMs (e.g., whether they are busy); (4) check the status of a kernel
(e.g., whether it is complete or not); and (5) offload computation
including two types: offloading a task kernel to a specific programmable
PIM, and further offloading a recursive kernel to a fixed function PIM.

5. Evaluation
5.1. Environmental setup
Performance modeling. We adopt Synopsys Design Compiler [34]
and PrimeTime [35] with Verilog HDL to model fixed function PIM and
programmable PIM architectures separately. We adopt hybrid memory
cube (HMC) 2.0 [36] for timing parameters and configurations to
evaluate the proposed 3D memory stack based heterogeneous PIM.
According to the HMC, each bank of the cube can provide an internal bandwidth of 10 GB/s, and the total internal bandwidth of our
design is 240 GB/s. The cube provides 4 multiple serial links as offchip interfaces, each providing an external bandwidth of 120 GB/s.
We use PIN [37] to collect instruction traces. We build a C++-based
cycle-accurate simulation tool to evaluate the performance of different
workloads. We validate the simulation tool through analyzing the
functionality, timing, and power result between the simulation and a
real-world CPU-based machine.
Energy and area modeling. To evaluate energy and area consumption, we exploit the 10 nm technology node for the logic die
and the 25 nm technology node for the DRAM die. We measure the
full system energy consumption, which includes CPU and memory.
We test the peak power and area of the PIMs by following the stateof-the-art work of Liu et al. [26]. We measure the CPU and GPU
power via statistical collection tools, such as VTune [38] and nvidiasmi. We model the power and area usage of programmable PIMs with
McPAT [39], and that of fixed function PIMs with Synopsys Design
Compiler and PrimeTime.
Workloads. We use QE (GPU version) as our baseline to evaluate
the performance of our design, which represents the state-of-the-art version. We take ‘‘qe-gpu-benchmarks’’ [29] as our workload because
this workload can be tested on both of the CPU and GPU environments.
We choose two input problems: Si63Ge-vc-relax and AUSURF112 as our
test cases. These two input problems are representative and can reflect
the performance characterization of most input problems in QE.
Configurations. We evaluate the performance of heterogeneous
PIM under diverse environments: (i) Only CPU-based system: 2 CPU
of Intel Xeon E5-2670-v3@2.30 GHz with 128 GB DDR4 and (ii) A
heterogeneous system with CPUs and GPUs: 2 GPUs of NVIDIA
Tesla P100. The operating system of machine is ubuntu-16.04, and the
kernel version is 4.4.0-31-generic. We use PGI-19.4 as the compiler,
Intel MKL-2018.4 as mathematical library, OpenMPI-3.1.3 for MPI, and
CUDA-10.1 for GPU.

4.3. Application modification
The major changes to the DQC implementation include adding or
modifying directives and reflecting code regions to specify workloads
to be offloaded to programmable/fixed function PIMs. We leverage the
existing OpenMP program constructs to offload workloads and speed
up FFT and time-consuming loops. This requires only minor changes to
the DQC implementation, as all of directives are based on the native
directives of OpenMP or CUDA. By using the native directives, we
introduce very little task creation and maintenance overhead to the
application. Furthermore, the decomposition of FFT and loops are also
based on the native implementation, and all we only need to do is
modify the directives to offload the workloads to the heterogeneous
PIMs instead of CPU cores/GPUs. Besides, we divide complex expressions (e.g., ((𝑎 + 𝑏) ∗ 𝑥 + (𝑐 + 𝑑) ∗ 𝑦 + (𝑒 + 𝑓 ) ∗ 𝑧) into small ones so
that they can take advantage of the fixed function PIMs pattern. The
heterogeneous PIMs can be easily implemented in the DQC application
through a mirror modification, i.e., about 200 lines of code.
4.4. Runtime system
The OpenMP runtime system needs to be modified to adapt the
runtime scheduling of codelets (mentioned in Section 3.2). We reuse
the existing implementation from the OpenMP project of LLVM. To
be more specific, we extend the metadata (a data structure) for each
OpenMP task to include physical address information. We employ
the work of Liu et al. [33] to detect the address mapping scheme
implemented in memory controllers. Given the address mapping and
physical address mapping, programmable PIMs can choose which set of
fixed function PIMs to use. We extend the runtime scheduling algorithm
in the OpenMP task to take full utilization of the heterogeneous PIMs.
Whenever a task completes, the scheduling algorithm launches a new
task that runs on programmable PIMs or CPU, and programmable
PIMs have a higher priority than CPU. We introduce a miniature
runtime system in programmable PIMs, in order to further coordinate
programmable PIMs, CPU, and fixed function PIMs. The runtime system
accepts the task assigned from the CPU, responds to queries, offloads
8

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

5.2. Performance evaluation
In our design, we use heterogeneous PIMs to speed up the QE
simulation. To demonstrate the efficiency of our method, we set up
four configurations for comparison. Then Figs. 6, 8–12 show the typical
results based on the input of ‘Si63Ge-vc-relax’, the results for the other
inputs behave similarly so we do not show them.
• A bare CPU without PIM: run the QE simulation only with
multi-processes on CPU cores only;
• A CPU–GPU system: run the QE simulation on a system with CPU
and GPUs;
• CPU only with fixed PIM: run the QE simulation on CPU and
use only fixed function PIMs;
• CPU only with programmable PIM: run the QE simulation on
CPU and use only programmable PIMs;
• Heterogeneous PIM (our design): run the QE simulation on CPU
and use heterogeneous PIM, which has the task queue formed by
coordinating CPU and programmable PIMs, and the prefetching
for fixed function PIMs.

Fig. 6. Execution time (using Si63Ge-vc-relaxe as input).

5.2.1. Execution time analysis
We use Fig. 6 to evaluate the performance of the four configurations
in terms of execution time. To analyze the performance of different
configurations in depth, we use six different settings of MPI processes
and break down the execution time. The execution time breakdown
includes the execution time of the FFT phase (shown as ‘‘FFT’’), the
loop phase (shown as ‘‘loops’’), the synchronization phase (shown as
‘‘sync’’), and others. The synchronization phase includes the latencies
of moving data and offloading tasks.
Fig. 6 shows that using heterogeneous PIM (our design), the DQC
application is remarkably effective in reducing the execution time of the
FFT and loop phases. Even with the synchronization overhead, heterogeneous PIM outperforms the other three configurations. Specifically,
we observe that heterogeneous PIM achieves an average speedup of
3.73×, 1.49×, and 1.25× over the bare CPU, CPU with fixed PIM, and
CPU with programmable PIM, respectively. The results reveal that most
of the performance improvement of the heterogeneous PIM comes from
the acceleration of FFTs and loops, which is up to 34.90× and 40.57×
over the bare CPU configuration, respectively.
As shown in the figure, the performance benefit of our heterogeneous PIM design comes from the balance between two computation
patterns, namely the fixed pattern (FFT phase) and the flexible pattern
(loop phase). For the configuration of CPU with fixed function PIMs,
we observe the inefficiency of reducing the execution time of the loop
phase. Similarly, the programmable PIMs is inefficient on the massive
computation of the FFT phase.
Our heterogeneous PIM design shows advantages on both computation patterns, maximizing the combined improvement and ultimately
performing better than other configurations. In addition, the heterogeneous PIM shows good scalability to larger numbers of MPI processes.
In the case of 24 MPI processes, the heterogeneous PIM achieves the
highest speedup of 4.09× over the bare CPU case.

Fig. 7. Execution time with different ratios of fixed function PIMs and programmable
PIMs.

decreased from ‘‘1:1’’ to ‘‘1:12’’, in which the ‘‘1:12’’ case saves an
average of 17.03% execution time compared to the ‘‘1:1’’ case.
Although the fixed units can speed up the DQC application, the
performance reaches its peak at the point of 1:12 in Fig. 7 and does
not improve even as the number of fixed units continues increasing
(e.g., to 1:27). This is because of a tradeoff between synchronization
overhead and hardware limitations: adding fixed units improves the
parallel efficiency but introduces additional synchronization overhead;
adding programmable units introduces flexibility but suffers from area
and thermal constraints.
Based on our observation, the performance of the DQC application
is sensitive to the heterogeneous ratio of fixed units and programmable
units. Exploring a Pareto optimal is essential to deploy on the heterogeneous PIMs for the user’s application. A heuristic or data-driven
approach may be helpful in practice, and we leave this topic for our
future work.
5.2.3. Comparison with the state-of-the-art
Comparison with GPU.
First, we evaluate the DQC application on the GPU accelerators.
We compare the performance of the CPU, GPU-based acceleration, and
heterogeneous PIM. For GPU-based acceleration, we enable 1–2 GPUs
to show its efficiency. Fig. 8 shows the results in terms of execution
time.
According to Fig. 8, we observe that GPU has a great acceleration
to DQC. However, the power of the GPU-based accelerator comes
primarily from its massive parallel processing units. When host-device
memory transfers and synchronization are factored out, the GPU case
outperforms the PIM case in terms of computation time. This means
that when GPUs are used in conjunction with few processes, or when
the GPUs use the same physical memory address space as the CPU
(e.g., NVIDIA Grace Hopper [40]), they can achieve a good acceleration
on DQC.
However, the current application of DQC on GPUs has the following
problems: (1) The insufficient memory size: The DQC simulation consumes more than hundreds of gigabytes of memory, which is usually

5.2.2. Heterogeneous ratio
In this section, we explore the impact of heterogeneous ratio on the
execution time. In the DQC application, the performance can vary with
different ratios of the fixed units and programmable units when using
the heterogeneous PIMs. We use two input problems, Si63Ge-vc-relax
and AUSURF112, with 12 MPI processes. As shown in Fig. 7, we break
down the execution time and each bar represents a heterogeneous ratio.
For example, the bar marked with ‘‘1:4’’ represents each programmable
PIM coupled with four fixed function PIMs.
Fig. 7 reveals that the execution time of DQC application decreases
as the number of fixed units increases. The execution time is gradually
9

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Fig. 10. Energy consumption (Si63Ge-vc-relaxe as input).

Fig. 8. Performance comparison between CPU, GPU and hetero PIMs (using
Si63Ge-vc-relax).

Fig. 11. Time(s) breakdown for task queue only cases and prefetch only cases (using
Si63Ge-vc-relaxe as input).
Fig. 9. Performance comparison between CPU, previous PIM design and our PIM design
(using Si63Ge-vc-relax).

during the data movement and task offloading phases. The computation
time for loops is reduced by an average of 67.15% compared to the
old design of [25]. The reason for such an improvement is that our
fixed-programmable ratio achieves a good balance between parallelism
and flexibility. Therefore, our design reduces the synchronization time
while providing a considerable parallel efficiency.

larger than the typical memory capacity of GPU devices. The lack of
GPU memory results in to out-of-memory (OOM) problems; (2) The
under-utilization of processing units: The DQC application uses a fixed
number of batch sizes in task launching, which results in some GPU
processing units being idle. In addition, the GPUs cannot be scheduled
and used as flexibly as CPUs and PIMs, so the GPUs cannot be busy
all the time; (3) The weak-scaling: the GPU-based acceleration shows
its efficiency only at some limited numbers of processes, such as NP
= 4 and NP = 8. Increasing the number of processes does not help
to improve the GPU acceleration; and (4) The high cost: The cost of
deploying the number of GPUs to meet the DQC requirements is very
high, both in terms of money and energy consumption, which hinders
the application of DQC on GPUs.
Inversely, the heterogeneous PIM shows its efficiency: (1) the heterogeneous PIM shows its good scalability in larger number of processors. The heterogeneous PIM achieves up to 2.60× speedup compared
to the GPU-based acceleration; (2) the heterogeneous PIMs have larger
memory capacity without OOM problem, and (3) the heterogeneous
PIMs can leverage programmable PIMs to achieve good flexibility.
Comparison with prior PIM design. Second, we present a stateof-the-art method [25] of heterogeneous PIM for comparison. Fig. 9
shows the comparison between the CPU, the state-of-the-art method
and our design. The state-of-the-art method (marked as ‘‘old PIM’’)
has an average speedup of 2.12× on average over a bare CPU case,
while our work (marked as ‘‘new PIM’’) achieves an average speedup
of 3.73×, which gains up to 76% performance improvement over the
state-of-the-art method.
We observe that a lot of execution time is consumed by synchronization (up to 34.83%) in the old PIM case because it is inefficient
to use only a single programmable PIM (with 4 cores) to offload
massive workloads, which becomes a bottleneck during task offloading.
In the new PIM case, the synchronization time is reduced by 97.22%

5.2.4. Energy consumption
Fig. 10 shows the dynamic energy consumption of CPU-only, GPUbased acceleration, and our design. The power of the CPU and the GPUbased acceleration is measured by statistical collection tools (VTune
and nvidia-smi) on real machines. The power of the heterogeneous
PIMs is measured by following the classical design of processing-inmemory in [26]. To evaluate the energy consumption of the whole
system, we include the consumption of both of the CPU and the
memory. We observe that the heterogeneous PIM achieves more than
65% energy savings over the CPU, and more than 66% and 72% energy
savings over one and two GPUs, respectively. The improvement in
energy consumption for our design comes mainly from the efficiency
of the fixed function PIMs.
5.2.5. Evaluation of software impact
In this section, we isolate the software methods from that of our
runtime system design in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the
task queue and prefetching design in Section 3.2.2. We present two
cases for peer compassion. The task-queue-only case is equipped only
with the task queue design without prefetching. The prefetch-only case
is equipped only with prefetching without the task queue. We study
the impact of these two cases on the execution time. We then give an
analysis of how they improve hardware utilization.
Execution time. Fig. 11 shows the efficiency of the task queue and
prefetching designs in terms of execution time. The task-queue-only
case (the second bar of each block) shows its efficiency in synchronization because it avoids waiting between the CPU and the programmable
PIM; the prefetch-only case (the third bar of each block) significantly
10

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

Various PIM architectures have been explored for different purposes, including Computational RAM [47], Intelligent RAM [48],
DIVA [49], FlexRAM [20], GraphR [32], iPIM [19], and Dadu-CD [22].
With the advancement of 3D integration technology, which facilitates
the stacking of logic and memory dies in a single package [50,51].
The PIM concept is regaining attention as it becomes more feasible.
However, most of the previous PIM designs did not consider the
computing patterns of the applications. They used very simple units
to improve parallelism, resulting in low hardware utilization.
Heterogeneous PIM. The heterogeneous PIM architecture has been
used in graph processing and neural network (NN) training to address
energy- and time-consuming problems. The Hetraph [18] focuses on
memory access in graph processing. Their PIM designs use simple
operations and work independently of the CPU. The PIM architecture
proposed by Liu et al. [25] is for NN training, which is more computationally intensive, and they have only a single programmable PIM in
their design.
PIM in high performance computing. Very minor work has explored in-memory architectures for HPC workloads. [23] introduced
Active Memory Cube (AMC), a 3D stacking technology, to accelerate
fluid dynamics and lattice quantum chromodynamics. NDC [52] focuses
on in-memory map-reduce workloads and localized memory accesses.
TOP-PIM [51] applies PIM close to the GPU to mitigate the frequent
memory accesses in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Due to the
large-scale data movement and processing in HPC, most applications
implicitly take the risk of huge memory footprint and intensive data
access. Conversely, such characteristics in HPC show vast opportunities
to apply PIM techniques. Our heterogeneous design provides a possible
approach to mitigate these overheads in the HPC domain.

Fig. 12. Hardware utilization in % (Si63Ge-vc-relaxe).

accelerates the computation of the FFT because this case achieves a
higher fixed function PIM utilization by prefetching the operation.
On average, task-queue-only and prefetch-only gain 2.05× and 2.91×,
respectively, over the CPU-only case. However, the combination of
the two mechanisms consistently performs better across all test problems (3.76× on average), proving the necessity of combining the two
methods.
On the other hand, since DQC requires an enormous amount of
memory, while GPUs can only provide a very limited amount of memory. Task optimization between main memory and GPU memory will
significantly increase the data exchange overhead. Therefore, the GPUs
can hardly benefit from a task optimization approach. However, if the
GPUs have enough flexible units and use the same physical memory
address space as the CPU (e.g., NVIDIA Grace Hopper [40]), the GPUs
can benefit from the task optimization approach. This requires further
study of the GPU architecture.
Hardware utilization. We further analyze the efficiency of the task
queue and prefetching design by evaluating the hardware utilization of
the PIM. The CPU case executes the application on CPU plus heterogeneous PIM without our task queue and prefetching method. As shown in
Fig. 12, the task queue and prefetching design improves the hardware
utilization of the PIM. The task-queue-only case and the prefetch-only
case can achieve 74% and 88% PIM utilization, respectively, over
the bare CPU case (taken as our baseline). This improvement comes
from reducing the idle time of the processing units. While our design,
which combines both the task queue and prefetching designs, achieves
the highest utilization, i.e., 93% on average. The hardware utilization
evaluation shows that the performance improvement of our software
design is mainly based on efficient hardware utilization.

7. Conclusions
Combining the strengths of fixed function PIMs and programmable
PIMs provides enormous benefits in terms of memory movement, parallelism, energy consumption, and flexibility. In this paper, we introduce
a hardware–software co-design to efficiently exploit the heterogeneous
PIM design. Our design involves a trade-off between parallelism and
flexibility in the hardware and runtime systems to maximize the performance and hardware utilization of the heterogeneous PIM. We show
that with our design, the memory-intensive application, DQC, can be
accelerated by up to 4.09× and 2.60× on CPU and GPU, respectively,
and gain up to 88% energy improvement on GPU(s). Finally, the
proposed heterogeneous PIM design is expected to accelerate other
memory-intensive algorithms with our programming models.

6. Related work

Declaration of competing interest

Acceleration of DFT. The density functional theory based ab initio quantum chemistry method [10] has been widely and successfully applied in scientific simulations such as materials science [41],
nanotechnology [42] and biological applications [43].
How to efficiently and effectively implement DFT simulation is up
until now a significant challenge [44]. It is too expensive to apply
specific hardware to DFT calculation because its computational pattern
is not fixed. The mainstream approach to accelerate DFT is still to use
GPUs or many-core systems [45,46], which are expensive and have low
hardware utilization.
Processing-in-Memory. As application complexity increases, modern architectures reach their limits, which requires improving the
efficiency of data transport and eliminating the associated overhead in
terms of execution time and energy consumption. This can be addressed
by integrating compute units closer to the data stores, which is achieved
through processing-in-memory (PIM) designs.

No author associated with this paper has disclosed any potential or
pertinent conflicts which may be perceived to have impending conflict
with this work. For full disclosure statements refer to https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.parco.2023.103017.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by Natural Science Foundation of
China Grants 41930110 and 61872272.
11

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.

References

[23] P.F. Baumeister, H. Boettiger, J.R. Brunheroto, T. Hater, T. Maurer, A. Nobile,
D. Pleiter, Accelerating LBM and LQCD application Kernels by in-memory processing, in: International Conference on High Performance Computing, Springer,
2015, pp. 96–112.
[24] D. Kim, J. Kung, S. Chai, S. Yalamanchili, S. Mukhopadhyay, Neurocube: A
programmable digital neuromorphic architecture with high-density 3D memory, in: 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, ISCA, IEEE, 2016, pp. 380–392.
[25] J. Liu, H. Zhao, M.A. Ogleari, D. Li, J. Zhao, Processing-in-memory for energyefficient neural network training: A heterogeneous approach, in: IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2018.
[26] Y. Zhu, B. Wang, D. Li, J. Zhao, Integrated thermal analysis for processing in
die-stacking memory, in: Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on
Memory Systems, 2016, pp. 402–414.
[27] M. Head-Gordon, Quantum chemistry and molecular processes, J. Phys. Chem.
100 (31) (1996).
[28] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli,
G.L. Chiarotti, M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, QUANTUM ESPRESSO: A modular and
open-source software project for quantum simulations of materials, J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 21 (39) (2009) 395502.
[29] romerojosh,
qe-gpu-benchmarks.
https://github.com/romerojosh/qe-gpubenchmarks.
[30] M. Motoyoshi, Through-silicon via (TSV), Proc. IEEE 97 (1) (2009) 43–48.
[31] S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics, J.
Comput. Phys. 117 (1) (1995) 1–19.
[32] L. Song, Y. Zhuo, X. Qian, H. Li, Y. Chen, GraphR: Accelerating graph processing
using ReRAM, in: 2018 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance
Computer Architecture, HPCA, 2018, pp. 531–543, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
HPCA.2018.00052.
[33] L. Liu, Z. Cui, M. Xing, Y. Bao, M. Chen, C. Wu, A software memory partition approach for eliminating bank-level interference in multicore systems, in:
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Parallel Architectures and
Compilation Techniques, ACM, 2012, pp. 367–376.
[34] Synopsys, Design Compiler, https://www.synopsys.com/support/training/rtlsynthesis/design-compiler-rtl-synthesis.html.
[35] Synopsys, PrimeTime, https://www.synopsys.com/support/training/signoff/
primetime1-fcd.html.
[36] HMCC, Hybrid Memory Cube Specification 2.0, http://http://www.
hybridmemorycube.org/.
[37] C.-K. Luk, R. Cohn, R. Muth, H. Patil, A. Klauser, G. Lowney, S. Wallace, V.J.
Reddi, K. Hazelwood, Pin: Building customized program analysis tools with
dynamic instrumentation, in: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation, New York, NY, USA,
2005, pp. 190–200.
[38] J. Reinders, VTune performance analyzer essentials, Intel Press, 2005.
[39] S. Li, J.H. Ahn, R.D. Strong, J.B. Brockman, D.M. Tullsen, N.P. Jouppi, McPAT:
An integrated power, area, and timing modeling framework for multicore
and manycore architectures, in: Proceedings of the 42Nd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2009, pp. 469–480.
[40] NVIDIA grace hopper superchip architecture.
[41] J.E. Saal, S. Kirklin, M. Aykol, B. Meredig, C. Wolverton, Materials design and
discovery with high-throughput density functional theory: The open quantum
materials database (OQMD), Jom 65 (11) (2013) 1501–1509.
[42] J. Wilhelm, M. Walz, F. Evers, Ab initio quantum transport through armchair
graphene nanoribbons: Streamlines in the current density, Phys. Rev. B 89 (19)
(2014) 195406.
[43] R.A. Friesner, B.D. Dunietz, Large-scale ab initio quantum chemical calculations
on biological systems, Acc. Chem. Res. 34 (5) (2001) 351–358.
[44] U. Alekseeva, G. Michalicek, D. Wortmann, S. Blügel, Hybrid parallelization and
performance optimization of the FLEUR code: New possibilities for all-electron
density functional theory, in: M. Aldinucci, L. Padovani, M. Torquati (Eds.), EuroPar 2018: Parallel Processing, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018, pp.
735–748.
[45] M. Lupo Pasini, B. Turcksin, W. Ge, J.-L. Fattebert, A parallel strategy for
density functional theory computations on accelerated nodes, Parallel Comput.
100 (2020) 102703.
[46] H. Ahmed, D.B. Williams-Young, K.Z. Ibrahim, C. Yang, Performance modeling
and tuning for DFT calculations on heterogeneous architectures, in: 2021
IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops,
IPDPSW, 2021, pp. 714–722.
[47] D.G. Elliott, M. Stumm, W.M. Snelgrove, C. Cojocaru, R. McKenzie, Computational RAM: Implementing processors in memory, IEEE Des. Test Comput. 16
(1) (1999) 32–41.

[1] B. Wang, M. Torres, D. Li, J. Zhao, F. Rusu, Performance Implications of
Processing-in-Memory Designs on Data-Intensive Applications, Technical Report
(TR-01), 2016.
[2] K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman, Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition, 2014, arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556.
[3] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G.E. Hinton, Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[4] M. Frigo, S.G. Johnson, The design and implementation of FFTW3, Proc. IEEE
93 (2) (2005) 216–231.
[5] J. Yu, A. Lukefahr, D. Palframan, G. Dasika, R. Das, S. Mahlke, Scalpel: Customizing DNN pruning to the underlying hardware parallelism, in: Proceedings
of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture, ISCA ’17,
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 548–560,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3079856.3080215.
[6] D.E. Shaw, M.M. Deneroff, R.O. Dror, J.S. Kuskin, R.H. Larson, J.K. Salmon, C.
Young, B. Batson, K.J. Bowers, J.C. Chao, et al., Anton, a special-purpose machine
for molecular dynamics simulation, Commun. ACM 51 (7) (2008) 91–97.
[7] D.J. Griffiths, Introduction to quantum mechanics, Amer. J. Phys. 63 (8) (2005).
[8] W. Kohn, Fundamentals of density functional theory, in: Density Functionals:
Theory and Applications: Proceedings of the Tenth Chris Engelbrecht Summer
School in Theoretical Physics Held At Meerensee, Near Cape Town South Africa,
19–29 January 1997, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998, pp.
1–7, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0106731.
[9] W. Kohn, L.J. Sham, Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects, Phys. Rev. 140 (1965) A1133–A1138, http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRev.140.A1133, URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.140.A1133.
[10] R.A. Friesner, Ab initio quantum chemistry: Methodology and applications, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 102 (19) (2005) 6648–6653.
[11] M. Gokhale, B. Holmes, K. Iobst, Processing in memory: The Terasys massively
parallel PIM array, Computer 28 (4) (1995) 23–31, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
2.375174.
[12] J. Draper, J. Chame, M. Hall, C. Steele, T. Barrett, J. LaCoss, J. Granacki, J.
Shin, C. Chen, C.W. Kang, I. Kim, G. Daglikoca, The architecture of the DIVA
processing-in-memory chip, in: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
on Supercomputing, ICS ’02, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 2002, pp. 14–25, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/514191.514197.
[13] S. Angizi, D. Fan, GraphiDe: A graph processing accelerator leveraging in-DRAMcomputing, in: Proceedings of the 2019 on Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI,
GLSVLSI ’19, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2019,
pp. 45–50, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3299874.3317984.
[14] S. Angizi, J. Sun, W. Zhang, D. Fan, AlignS: A processing-in-memory accelerator
for DNA short read alignment leveraging SOT-MRAM, in: 2019 56th ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference, DAC, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[15] J. Romero, E. Phillips, G. Ruetsch, M. Fatica, F. Spiga, P. Giannozzi, A
performance study of quantum ESPRESSO’s PWscf code on multi-core and GPU
systems, in: International Workshop on Performance Modeling, Benchmarking
and Simulation of High Performance Computer Systems, Springer, 2017, pp.
67–87.
[16] M. Hacene, A. Anciaux-Sedrakian, X. Rozanska, D. Klahr, T. Guignon, P.
Fleurat-Lessard, Accelerating VASP electronic structure calculations using graphic
processing units, J. Comput. Chem. 33 (32) (2012).
[17] I. Girotto, N. Varini, F. Spiga, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, L. Martin-Samos,
T. Gorni, Enabling of Quantum ESPRESSO to Petascale Scientific Challenges,
PRACE, 2012.
[18] Y. Huang, L. Zheng, P. Yao, J. Zhao, J. Xue, A heterogeneous PIM
hardware-software co-design for energy-efficient graph processing, in: 2020 IEEE
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS, 2020.
[19] P. Gu, X. Xie, Y. Ding, G. Chen, W. Zhang, D. Niu, Y. Xie, iPIM: Programmable
in-memory image processing accelerator using near-bank architecture, in: 2020
ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture,
ISCA, 2020, pp. 804–817, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISCA45697.2020.00071.
[20] J. Torrellas, Flexram: Toward an advanced intelligent memory system: A retrospective paper, in: 2012 IEEE 30th International Conference on Computer Design,
ICCD, IEEE, 2012, pp. 3–4.
[21] J. Ahn, S. Hong, S. Yoo, O. Mutlu, K. Choi, A scalable processing-in-memory
accelerator for parallel graph processing, Acm Sigarch Comput. Architect. News
43 (3) (2015) 105–117.
[22] Y. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Han, Dadu-CD: Fast and efficient processing-in-memory
accelerator for collision detection, in: 2020 57th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
Conference, DAC, 2020, pp. 1–6.
12

Parallel Computing 116 (2023) 103017

Z. Liu et al.
[48] D. Patterson, T. Anderson, N. Cardwell, R. Fromm, K. Keeton, C. Kozyrakis, R.
Thomas, K. Yelick, A case for intelligent RAM, IEEE Micro 17 (2) (1997) 34–44.
[49] M. Hall, P. Kogge, J. Koller, P. Diniz, J. Chame, J. Draper, J. LaCoss, J. Granacki,
J. Brockman, A. Srivastava, W. Athas, V. Freeh, Jaewook Shin, Joonseok Park,
Mapping irregular applications to DIVA, a PIM-based data-intensive architecture,
in: SC ’99: Proceedings of the 1999 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing,
1999, pp. 57–57.
[50] R. Nair, S.F. Antao, C. Bertolli, P. Bose, J.R. Brunheroto, T. Chen, C.-Y. Cher,
C.H. Costa, J. Doi, C. Evangelinos, et al., Active memory cube: A processingin-memory architecture for exascale systems, IBM J. Res. Dev. 59 (2/3) (2015)
17:1–17:14.

[51] D. Zhang, N. Jayasena, A. Lyashevsky, J.L. Greathouse, L. Xu, M. Ignatowski,
TOP-PIM: Throughput-oriented programmable processing in memory, in: Proceedings of the 23rd International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and
Distributed Computing, 2014, pp. 85–98.
[52] S.H. Pugsley, J. Jestes, H. Zhang, R. Balasubramonian, V. Srinivasan, A. Buyuktosunoglu, A. Davis, F. Li, NDC: Analyzing the impact of 3D-stacked memory+ logic
devices on MapReduce workloads, in: 2014 IEEE International Symposium on
Performance Analysis of Systems and Software, ISPASS, IEEE, 2014, pp. 190–200.

13

